Reports in this Red Book generally confirm the slightly more
optimistic tone of the two previous issues. Most districts report
moderate improvement both in retail sales and in manufacturers'
shipments and orders. Residential construction is very strong almost
everywhere. Defense cutbacks continue. Demand for business equipment
remains weak. Unemployment remains high with no present prospects
for improvement. Employment generally is steady to slightly higher.
Although a few scattered price declines were noted, one of the
clearest impressions through the district reports is a strengthening
of the inflationary psychology—in large part because of generous
wage settlements. Authorized and wildcat strikes continue to hamper
activity.
In the financial sector, a pickup in loan demand was noted in a
number of districts—especially New York, Chicago, and San Francisco.
Consumer and mortgage loan demand also is up. Savings inflows at
banks have slowed, but remain at a high level. Interest rates
charged by banks have firmed. Home mortgage rates are steady to
higher—by a quarter percentage point or more.
Businessmen and bankers now have learned to refer to the rapid
growth of the money supply, which they typically deem excessive and
inflationary. One "verbose" academician, however, finds the rapid
growth of the money supply to be eminently appropriate to
conditions. Increases in retail sales were reported in most
districts, but higher prices account for most of the gain from last
year. Stronger sales of autos, appliances, and home furnishings were
noted in a number of districts. A pickup in tourism was observed in
the Minneapolis and Atlanta Districts.
The pace of the recovery appears to have moderated in the Cleveland
District, but this partly reflects the beginning of the cutback in
steel production as inventory buildups are completed. Districts
commenting on the potential steel strike that may start August 1,
expected a settlement or a relatively short strike.
Among the strongest sectors are residential construction and the
industries that supply building materials and components. At the
other extreme are defense industries and capital goods (other than
utilities)—with machine tools severely depressed. In some districts—Richmond and Atlanta—strength in nonresidential construction was
noted.
Business inventories, except for strike hedges, are generally under
good control—a point emphasized by New York and
St. Louis. Richmond
finds some manufacturers' inventories on the high side.
A number of districts commented on farm income prospects. Drought
conditions are hurting crops and cattle in the Dallas District,
while growing conditions are favorable in the San Francisco and St.
Louis Districts. Planted corn acreage is larger this year in the
Chicago District, and crop prospects would be favorable, but for the
specter of the corn blight. In general, it is expected that higher
prices will boost farm cash receipts in the nation in the second
half of 1971, but net farm income for the year may be lower than in
1970 because of rising costs.