Businessmen continue to remain cautious on the economy. Steel
stockpiling does not appear to be providing as strong an
underpinning to second quarter economic activity as was anticipated
earlier. Although the supply of mortgage funds for financing
residential construction remains ample, the rate of deposit inflows
is below the levels of earlier this year. One businessman is sure
the recent turnaround in interest rates will slow recovery, while
another thinks it represents a correction for an overly rapid
decline. Others feel that progress against inflation will be
extremely difficult so long as monopoly power prevails to the extent
that it does. One of these rejects wage-price controls as
unenforceable and ineffective because the cause is not treated.
Thus, considerable confusion exists as to what is happening and what
needs to be done.
Users and producers of steel indicate only modest stockpiling to
date. Some who are carrying larger-than-usual steel inventories give
reasons other than, or in addition to, the likelihood of a strike.
One manufacturer blames lower-than-expected sales. Another claims to
be hedging against further price increases. Still another thinks a
prolonged strike most unlikely, although he admits to buying steel
ahead—just in case. One purchasing agent points to mill ads for
certain types of steel not normally available in shortage situations
as evidence of little industrywide stockpiling. He adds that, if
there is not a strike, steel producers will be faced with a slow
fourth quarter as users are evidently accumulating adequate
inventories considering current rates of use.
Steel producers and service centers throughout the District confirm
the reports of only light overall stockpiling by their customers. A
major steel producer in the Denver area describes orders as
disappointing. He believes that steel demand is being held back by
uncertainty in the economy and because steel companies are not
providing financing for 60 to 90 days this time as they have done
previously. A service center in Omaha says it is not doing much
hedge buying because of the possibility of a construction strike in
June but may do a little after this uncertainty is resolved. Two
companies in Oklahoma give similar reports of only light hedging. A
pair of steel distributors in Kansas City answered "some" to the
question of steel stockpiling. One terms July an open-tonnage month,
with plenty of room for orders. This has not characterized past
strike-year patterns and gives users more room to hedge later, he
said. The other pointed out that business is not such that firms are
stockpiling in anticipation of strikes as in the past. Several of
those contacted pointed to foreign supplies of steel and supplies
from independents unaffected by a strike as contributing to the
reasons for little stockpiling.
Farm machinery sales show some indications of improvement after two
years of sluggish activity. Within the Tenth District, however, the
prospects remain somewhat mixed, as sales in those areas suffering
from the current drought are not expected to improve over last year.
In fact, some decline seems likely. According to the machinery
companies contacted, sales during the October-April period were
generally disappointing—running 5 to 10 percent below
year-earlier
levels. However, the companies indicated that sales have recently
picked up sharply, as farmers moved into the spring planting season
and began preparations for the wheat harvest. One company reported
an 11-percent increase in combine sales, and all representatives
stated that large tractors (l00+hp) have been moving especially
well. With the exception of the drought areas, the outlook is
generally optimistic for the remainder of the year, with sales
expected to run moderately above 1970 levels. Much of the impetus
for this expected improvement arises from the more flexible planting
features of the new farm program, easier credit conditions,
relatively high grain prices, and the deferred buying actions taken
by farmers during the past two years.
The demand for mortgage credit has been heavy during the past few
months throughout the Tenth District, except in areas where layoffs
have been particularly high and have dampened consumer enthusiasm.
Demand for funds to finance the purchase and construction of single-
family units remains strong. The apparent bottoming out of interest
rates has added some boost to demand, encouraging borrowers to go
ahead with their home buying plans rather than wait for lower
interest rates. However, the demand for funds may be slackening
somewhat in the multi-family area.
Some increases in mortgage lending rates have occurred during recent
weeks. In line with national developments, the points charged on
FHA-VA insured mortgages have increased from the 2.5-3 to the 4-5
area during the past two weeks. In some cases, conventional mortgage
rates have ticked up a notch. The prevailing rate on an 80-percent
conventional loan is 7 1/2 percent (plus 1 percent origination fee).
The supply of mortgage funds for purchase and construction of
conventional single-family units remains quite ample. Savings and
loan associations report continuing strong deposit flows and
mortgage commitments continue to rise. However, the rate of deposit
inflows is below that which occurred earlier in the year. Savings
and loan associations are responding by reducing their purchases of
FHA-VA mortgages in the secondary market. This slowing of funds
flowing into the secondary market is causing problems for some
mortgage companies caught without commitments. In the multi-family
area, the supply of funds has tightened in some cases due to the
feeling on the part of the lenders that some overbuilding may be
occurring in this area.