The general mood of businessmen, bankers, and economists in the
Third District is that the recovery is continuing but at a gradual
pace. Caution is still dominating inventory and plant and equipment
decisions. Some step-up in hiring plans is occurring at the
manufacturing level. On balance, inflationary expectations seem to
be somewhat stronger than they were a few weeks ago. Bankers expect
long-term rates to rise further. The mood of manufacturers in the
Third District is generally optimistic. Most of them believe the
economy will continue to expand. For the immediate weeks ahead, they
forecast an upward trend for new orders and sales. However, they
remain cautious about building inventories and boosting outlays for
new plant and equipment.
Increased business activity apparently is beginning to have an
expansionary impact on hiring plans for District manufacturers.
Since early 1970, more area manufacturers were laying off more
workers than they were hiring. For most of the second half of last
year, the percentage laid off was substantially greater than the
percentage hired. This gap began to close earlier in 1971. For the
last two months, the number of manufacturing firms adding to their
payrolls has equaled the number cutting back. Nearly four times the
number of manufacturers who were polled plan to increase the number
of employees six months from now as plan decreases.
Inflationary expectations, however, continue to be very much alive.
One director believes they are actually increasing. He says costs
are rising rapidly and are exerting upward pressure on wholesale
prices. Sooner or later, he says, prices at retail will begin
accelerating again. There is fairly widespread acceptance of this
view. Most businessmen that we talked with believe that inflation is
still the number one economic problem facing the nation.
A sampling of business economists in the Philadelphia area indicates
that most are still forecasting a $1,045-1,050-billion GNP for 1971,
with an unemployment rate near 6 percent at year-end. There is some
disagreement, however, on the outlook for inflation. One group
believes that a gradual recovery with lingering unemployment will be
enough to dampen the pace of upward price movements. The other group
contends that wage-push pressures are simply too great to be
checked, even with the amount of excess capacity that is likely to
prevail for the balance of the year.
Loan demand at banks is still on a very modest upward path. Most
bankers we talked with anticipate that long-term rates will move up
further. The reasons cited most often are a continuation of rising
loan demand and the belief that inflationary expectations will
intensify rather than abate. One country banker said he feels so
strongly about higher rates that he wouldn't touch a 20-year
mortgage for less than 8 1/2 percent.