The moderate improvement in sentiment noted a month ago is still
evident. But signs of a vigorous uptrend, except in residential
building, remain elusive. Job markets appear to have stabilized,
with some scattered rehirings, but students and teachers are
swelling the number of job seekers. Prospects are even less
favorable than earlier for a significant diminution of upward price
pressures. Demand for long-term funds remains strong, but demand for
bank loans continues weak, although commitment volume has picked up
sharply. There is no indication that the economy will again slide
into a slump, but the reversal of the build-up in steel inventories
after July and the ending of other temporary stimuli are expected to
dampen the business uptrend. Looking ahead to 1972, a broadly based
recovery is widely anticipated.
Orders have improved moderately for a variety of consumer goods,
capital goods, components, and materials in the past several weeks.
In almost all sectors, however, the order lead time remains very
short. Nevertheless, stronger demand has encouraged price increases
for such items as steel, nonferrous metals, building materials,
plastics, and chemicals.
Inventories of most items are said to be well in line with
requirements. Exceptions are extra holdings of steel, aluminum, and
copper, awaiting strike developments. Many manufacturers have
reduced goods-in-process inventories.
The outlook remains bleak for capital equipment generally. Farm
equipment sales are reported to have improved recently, but data for
first quarter show a large deficit from a year ago. The picture on
construction-related equipment is mixed, with greatest strength in
exports and mining equipment. The only really vigorous demand is for
equipment related to pollution control.
Steel orders have slowed down to a level below shipments.
Nevertheless, some transportation problems are beginning to hamper
deliveries to steel users. On steel strike possibilities, it is
generally recognized that the terms incorporated in the auto, can
(and now, aluminum) settlements should set the pattern for
agreement. Nevertheless, local problems and militant leaders may
force a strike.
Concern about foreign competition continues to rise—in steel,
machinery, and consumer goods. Some producers who used to emphasize
an all-American product are developing or are seeking foreign
sources for components (even including such bulky items as
castings).
The current auto sales picture is clouded by effects of sales
incentive programs. Inventories are now about right. Total sales of
9.8 million cars (including 1.5 million imports) will require strong
demand for 1972 models.
With few exceptions, bankers continue to report demand for business
loans as slow and disappointing. But there has been a sharp pickup
in demand for firm commitments—paid for by fees or balances. Lines
of credit, term loans, and revolving credit are all mentioned. Most
of these commitments reflect a desire for insurance against future
stringencies, because there is little indication that funds will be
required in the near future. With slow business loan demand, banks
are showing increased interest in mortgages, consumer credit, and
broker loans.
More bankers, especially in Michigan, are investigating the
advantages of holding companies and possible acquisitions of "bank-related" enterprises.
Inflows to bank savings accounts are reported to have slackened in
recent weeks. CD money is not being sought aggressively. Savings
inflows to S&Ls, however, remain very strong.