Note: This report was prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco based on information collected on or before October 6, 2025. This document summarizes comments received from contacts outside the Federal Reserve System and is not a commentary on the views of Federal Reserve officials.
Overall Economic Activity
Economic activity changed little on balance since the previous report, with three Districts reporting slight to modest growth in activity, five reporting no change, and four noting a slight softening. Overall consumer spending, particularly on retail goods, inched down in recent weeks, although auto sales were boosted in some Districts by strong demand for electric vehicles ahead of the expiration of a federal tax credit at the end of September. Demand for leisure and hospitality services by international travelers fell further over the reporting period, while demand by domestic consumers was largely unchanged. Nevertheless, spending by higher-income individuals on luxury travel and accommodation was reportedly strong. Several reports highlighted that lower- and middle-income households continued to seek discounts and promotions in the face of rising prices and elevated economic uncertainty. Manufacturing activity varied by District, and most reports noted challenging conditions due to higher tariffs and waning overall demand. Activity in agriculture, energy, and transportation was generally down among reporting Districts. Conditions in the financial services sector and other interest rate-sensitive sectors, such as residential and commercial real estate, were mixed; some reports noted improved business lending in recent weeks due to lower interest rates, while other reports continued to highlight muted activity. The outlook for future economic growth varied by District and sector. Sentiment reportedly improved in a few Districts, with some contacts expecting an uptick in demand over the next 6 to 12 months. However, many others continued to expect elevated uncertainty to weigh down activity. One District report highlighted the downside risk to growth from a prolonged government shutdown.
Labor Markets
Employment levels were largely stable in recent weeks, and demand for labor was generally muted across Districts and sectors. In most Districts, more employers reported lowering head counts through layoffs and attrition, with contacts citing weaker demand, elevated economic uncertainty, and, in some cases, increased investment in artificial intelligence technologies. Employers that reported hiring generally noted improved labor availability, and some favored hiring temporary and part-time workers over offering full-time employment opportunities. Nevertheless, labor supply in the hospitality, agriculture, construction, and manufacturing sectors was reportedly strained in several Districts due to recent changes to immigration policies. Wages grew across all reporting Districts, generally at a modest to moderate pace, and labor cost pressures intensified in recent weeks due to outsized increases in employer-sponsored health insurance expenses.
Prices
Prices rose further during the reporting period. Several District reports indicated that input costs increased at a faster pace due to higher import costs and the higher cost of services such as insurance, health care, and technology solutions. Tariff-induced input cost increases were reported across many Districts, but the extent of those higher costs passing through to final prices varied. Some firms facing tariff-induced cost pressures kept their selling prices largely unchanged to preserve market share and in response to pushback from price-sensitive clients. However, there were also reports of firms in manufacturing and retail trades fully passing higher import costs along to their customers. Waning demand in some markets reportedly pushed prices down for some materials, such as steel in the Sixth District and lumber in the Twelfth District.
Highlights by Federal Reserve District
Boston
Economic activity expanded slightly, with modest growth in consumer spending. Employment was flat, as both hiring and layoffs increased modestly. Prices increased at a moderate pace, although certain cost pressures intensified. Home sales were flat from a year earlier. The outlook was neutral to cautiously optimistic, but contacts saw mostly downside risks.
New York
Economic activity continued to decline slightly. Employment held steady, and wage growth remained modest. The pace of price increases remained elevated but was little changed. Manufacturing activity held steady after a summer uptick. Consumer spending increased modestly, buoyed by mid- to upper-income households. Businesses did not expect activity to increase much in the months ahead.
Philadelphia
Business activity increased slightly in the current Beige Book period. Employment levels increased slightly, and wages again rose at modest pre-pandemic rates. Prices continued to rise moderately. Activity increased slightly for nonmanufacturers and moderately for manufacturers. Generally, firms expect modest growth over the next six months, but heightened economic uncertainty remains.
Cleveland
Fourth District business activity was flat in recent weeks, but contacts expected activity to increase modestly in months ahead. Commercial construction and financial services contacts noted an uptick in demand because of lower interest rates. Contacts said that cost growth remained robust, while their selling prices increased modestly.
Richmond
The regional economy grew modestly in recent weeks. Consumer spending continued to grow modestly and import activity rose. Manufacturing activity declined slightly and growth in the remaining industries was largely flat. Employment levels were largely unchanged and wage growth remained moderate. Price growth remained moderate, overall, despite some pickup in price growth in the manufacturing sector.
Atlanta
The Sixth District economy was unchanged. Employment levels were steady, and wages grew modestly. Prices increased moderately. Consumer spending fell, and leisure travel softened. Home sales declined, and commercial real estate was unchanged. Transportation declined. Manufacturing grew slightly. Energy grew moderately, and agriculture was healthy.
Chicago
Economic activity in the Seventh District was flat. Consumer spending increased modestly; construction and real estate activity increased slightly; employment was flat; nonbusiness contacts saw no change in activity; business spending declined slightly; and manufacturing activity declined modestly. Prices rose moderately, wages were up modestly, and financial conditions loosened slightly. Prospects for 2025 farm income were unchanged.
St. Louis
Economic activity and employment levels have remained unchanged since our previous report. Contacts continue to report that immigration policies have been resulting in labor shortages. Prices have increased moderately, with contacts reporting that inflation is eroding consumer purchasing power. Banking activity has remained unchanged since our previous report, with overall credit conditions remaining strong. Agriculture conditions are strained and have further deteriorated. The outlook remains slightly pessimistic.
Minneapolis
District economic activity contracted slightly. Labor demand softened, according to firms and job seekers, though wage growth remained moderate. Price increases remained modest, but input price pressures increased. Manufacturing and commercial real estate were flat, but most other sectors contracted. Agricultural contacts were concerned about China's elimination of soybean purchases.
Kansas City
Economic activity in the Tenth District fell slightly over the past month. Employment levels declined slightly, and bankers noted consumer loan portfolios deteriorated moderately. Though activity fell recently, expectations for sales and employment in 2026 were broadly optimistic. Expectations for the pace of price growth in 2026 were similarly above 2025 levels.
Dallas
Economic activity was flat. Service sector activity contracted mildly. Retail sales fell, while the pace of manufacturing output growth moderated. Loan demand grew, but the housing market remained weak, and drilling and well completion activity was flat. Employment dipped, and wage growth was modest. Price pressures were subdued in services but remained elevated in the manufacturing sector. Outlooks deteriorated with slowing demand, policy uncertainty, and inflation highlighted as the top concerns for businesses.
San Francisco
Economic activity edged down slightly. Employment levels were little changed. Wages grew slightly, and prices rose modestly. Activity in retail trade, agriculture, and residential real estate decreased somewhat while commercial real estate activity was unchanged. Manufacturing and lending activity remained stable. Conditions in consumer and business services were mixed.