Summary of Economic Activity
Economic activity in the Twelfth District was up slightly during the January to mid-February reporting period. Employment levels rose slightly, and labor was more available. Prices and wages both increased overall but at slower rates. Retail sales were stable, while activity in the services sectors grew modestly. Demand for manufactured products and conditions in the agriculture and resource-related sectors remained unchanged on net. Residential real estate activity rose somewhat, while that for commercial real estate was largely unchanged. Financial sector conditions were little changed. For communities across the District, demand for care and shelter support services remained high. Looking ahead, contacts expect weaker economic conditions overall relative to late 2023, though they expressed a little more optimism than in the previous reporting period.
Labor Markets
Employment levels grew slightly over the reporting period. Contacts in sectors such as real estate and leisure and hospitality reported expanding headcounts in recent weeks. Finance, technology, and business services held employee counts flat or let levels decline with attrition or layoffs. Several employers in health and agriculture reported utilizing automation tools and emerging technology solutions to boost productivity and improve efficiency. Employers generally filled positions with greater ease, though hiring skilled workers across sectors remained difficult. Reports indicated that applicant pools expanded and contained more qualified candidates. Still, some contacts in California noted stiff competition for labor from bigger companies and employers for government projects.
Wages increased slightly over the reporting period. Employers offered wage increases in line with inflation and provided additional benefits to attract and retain workers. Contacts reported that some employers fully absorbed recent increases in health insurance premiums and continued to offer hybrid or fully remote work. One contact in Nevada noted that employees preferred remote work because it allowed them to more easily take a second job.
Prices
Prices increased slightly in recent weeks. Nonlabor cost pressures moderated across sectors. For energy, steel, and replacement machinery parts, prices rose at a similar or slower pace relative to the previous reporting period. For other inputs such as wallboard, cement, and food services supplies, price levels were unchanged or slightly lower. Prices for consumer goods and services increased modestly or remained flat overall. However, prices for some grocery items, including staples and produce, fell recently. Limited abilities to pass through elevated costs to customers constrained price increases by those firms in business services and retail sectors.
Community Conditions
Demand for community support and services remained high. Households and other community members sought support for childcare, rental assistance, affordable housing, food assistance, and mental health services. Nonprofit organizations reported a drop in charitable donations, which further constrained meeting the community's elevated demand for basic needs. Reports highlighted difficulties by small businesses across the District, particularly in rural areas, to access credit. A few contacts in Hawaii mentioned ongoing challenges, such as housing instability, and the long-term impacts facing the communities displaced by last year's wildfires in Maui.
Retail Trade and Services
Consumer spending on retail goods was stable at solid levels. Demand for groceries and other basic necessities was strong, but consumers continued to cut down on discretionary spending in response to elevated prices. E-commerce retailers noted muted demand for full price products while promotional offerings boosted online sales. Home centers reported lower sales of wood products. Contacts across the District reported above-average inventories following the holiday season. However, one contact noted that retailers that had previously decided to limit inventory levels to cut costs experienced product shortages and offered fewer new products recently.
Activity in the consumer and business services sectors grew modestly in recent weeks. Demand for logistics, legal, and consulting services was unchanged. Contacts reported that several consulting firms increased staffing capacity to take on new projects in recent weeks. Demand for health-care services grew further, and the industry remained near capacity. Demand for leisure and hospitality services in most of the District moderated somewhat due to expected seasonal fluctuations. In contrast, Nevada contacts reported that the economic impact of February's NFL Super Bowl LVIII held in Las Vegas exceeded expectations, and that the boost to the local economy was in line with that of the Formula 1 race held in the city last November.
Manufacturing
Demand for manufactured products was unchanged on net. Demand for capital equipment strengthened as firms in the food and beverages, personal care, and medical industries boosted investments in productivity-enhancing products. Soft construction activity and poor weather dampened demand for wood products. Reports indicated that ongoing shipping disruptions in the Red Sea have not had a notable impact on production and businesses across the Twelfth District. In contrast, a contact in the ocean freight industry reported that severe drought conditions in the Panama Canal boosted traffic at ports across the West Coast. Many container ships heading from Asia opted to dock on the West Coast and use rail to transport cargoes to their destinations across the country instead of using the canal to reach East Coast ports.
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries
Conditions in agriculture and resource-related industries were largely comparable to the previous reporting period. Domestic demand for fresh produce was solid, while that for logs remained soft. Demand for forested land with timber resources continued to grow. Despite a strong dollar, international demand for fruits, vegetables, and seafood increased over the reporting period. However, weaker economic activity in China and Japan led to lower exports of logs. Major seafood stocks remained stable. Record crop yields of apples and tree nuts in California and the Pacific Northwest had a dampening effect on wholesale prices.
Real Estate and Construction
Activity in the residential real estate market rose somewhat. Residential construction strengthened. Demand for single-family homes picked up slightly, as mortgage rates, though still elevated, moderated a bit in recent weeks. To attract reluctant homebuyers, some home builders began offering variable-rate mortgages at below-market interest rates, which revert to market pricing after a year, at which point buyers are reportedly expecting rates to be lower. The supply of multifamily rental units increased further as more construction projects were recently completed, thereby raising vacancy rates and putting downward pressure on rents. A contact from Hawaii noted that recent construction activity in the state has focused on affordable housing units.
Commercial real estate activity was largely unchanged from the previous reporting period. Demand for industrial and retail space was strong, but weak office leasing activity continued. Public infrastructure spending continued to boost overall construction activity across the District. Some private-sector commercial projects slowed on account of elevated costs and limited availability of skilled trades subcontractors, such as plumbers and electricians. Challenges persisted in obtaining some materials, particularly electrical equipment.
Financial Institutions
Lending activity changed little over the reporting period. Demand for most business and consumer loans was muted, particularly those for commercial real estate. Liquidity in the financial sector was stable overall, and deposit levels normalized in recent weeks. Reports indicated that competition for deposits eased of late as the financial industry observed less "rate-chasing" behavior from clients. Credit and asset quality were reportedly high despite some uptick in consumer loan delinquencies.