Business conditions continue spotty in the Fifth District.
Manufacturers surveyed this month have, on balance, experienced
further weakening of new orders, reduced order backlogs, and a
resumption of inventory accumulation. There is little indication,
however, that these conditions are pervasive or, in fact, that they
represent the underlying trend. Our directors, for instance, see
little evidence that demand for the products of firms in their areas
has slackened further in the past month. Nonetheless, the
expectations of District businessmen remain decidedly negative.
Retail sales have softened in recent weeks. Indications are that
wholesale and retail credit demands have also moderated. Most
lenders hold the view that, in the near-term at least, loan growth
will continue to slow.
Despite the continuing weakness in new orders, Fifth District
manufacturers were able to maintain the level of shipments over the
past month. More than 40 percent of the respondents to our survey of
manufacturers reported a decline in the volume of new orders over
the past month and nearly as many experienced further reductions in
order backlogs. Survey respondents also suggest a resumption of
inventory accumulation. Apparently most of the additions to stocks
took place in materials. Also, inventories appear not to have risen
relative to desired levels. The number of respondents viewing
current stocks as excessive has remained fairly stable for several
months now. The view that current plant and equipment capacity might
be in excess has become slightly more widespread recently, but
remains a minority position. There is still virtually no sentiment
for altering current expansion plans, however. Employment and weekly
hours worked both declined among our manufacturing respondents over
the latest survey period.
Most of our directors have seen little or no improvement in
conditions in their respective areas over the past month.
Nonetheless, they report some industries, e.g., textiles,
electronics, printing, food processing, continuing to show some
buoyancy. The directors continue to cite weakness in residential
real estate, automobiles, and some related areas such as
construction, primary metals, and glass. Despite what is apparently
perceived as a lack of any real strength, our directors are unaware
of any significant layoffs, unwanted inventory accumulation,
production retrenchments or other evidence of slackening demand.
Retail sales have softened slightly in the past few weeks, but
general merchandise lines such as those in department stores
continue to hold up. Big ticket items and home improvement lines are
contributing significantly to the broad weakness in total sales.
Retailers have apparently reduced their inventories somewhat and
there do not seem to be any serious problems in this area. Survey
responses suggest that there may be some significant price cutting
taking place at the retail level.
Despite the view among district lenders that loan growth will
continue to slow, few expect interest rates to decline by any
substantial amount. As has been the case for sometime, consumer
demand for personal loans is offsetting weakness in other areas, but
this source of strength is not as great as it has been. The larger
business customers of banks have been very quiet. There continues to
be a steady flow of smaller sized business loan requests, but only
in a very few cases have lenders seen firms seeking financing for
unusual inventory buildups. In some areas, e.g., Maryland,
industrial revenue bond financing for plant improvements is an
important source of funds.
Area lenders are beginning to see some signs of retrenchment on the
part of consumers insofar as the use of credit is concerned, but the
picture here is far from clear. Credit card volume, which is still
growing due to Christmas related expenditures, remains strong. A
number of banks, however, have commented on signs of weakness in
installment loan demand. Moreover, this developing weakness appears
to be broadly based and not due exclusively to slower automobile
sales. There has been some mention recently of increased
applications for second mortgage loans to be used for bill
consolidation. Residential mortgage financing is slowing, due
largely to decreased willingness on the part of borrowers to pay
high rates. The market has softened to such an extent that in some
areas rates have come down 1/4-1/2 percentage points from their peak
levels.
With both crop and livestock receipts significantly larger, the
District's total cash farm income during the third quarter of 1979
registered a 16 percent gain over a year earlier. The District
improvement, which compared with a 14 percent upturn nationally, may
well be somewhat lower at year-end 1979, however, because of the
sharply smaller tobacco and peanut crops.