Scattered signs of a slowdown in business activity in the Second
District have emerged in December, according to comments of District
directors and business leaders contacted recently. The major element
of strength remains department store sales, which posted a healthy
gain for the month as a whole. Outside of retailing, however,
business activity appears to have lost momentum. New orders for
capital goods have weakened and some order backlogs have declined.
Inventories are generally in line with sales expectations, although
some accumulations were reported developing among housing industry
suppliers. On the financial scene, the prospective suspension of
state-imposed mortgage rate ceilings is expected to have a major
impact on mortgage markets in New York and New Jersey. Overall
credit demands appear to have steadied.
Retailers in the Second District generally were satisfied with the
holiday shopping season. Traditional department stores appeared to
fare somewhat better than mass merchandisers. Among particular
goods, especially strong sellers were electronic toys, apparel and
other soft goods. Appliances and other large ticket items also sold
well in the downstate region, but the strength failed to spill over
into the Rochester-Buffalo area. The directors of the Buffalo Branch
reported that big ticket item purchases were weak. There was a sharp
pick up in holiday activity during the five days before Christmas at
New York City stores when the surge in sales often outpaced the
gains at suburban counterparts. While virtually all of the merchants
seemed satisfied with retailing activity, one major discount chain
reported an especially disappointing season. This chain blamed its
sluggish sales on its own policy of sharply restricting the
availability of customer credit. Inventories, for the most part, are
at planned levels as a result both of conscious efforts by merchants
to keep stocks lean and of relatively good December sales. Indeed,
spot shortages of some items were reported by a few respondents.
Automotive dealers in the District also seemed satisfied with new
car sales activity in December. Indeed, area dealers report that
with help of promotions and markdowns, virtually all leftover 1979
models have been cleared out. As a result, local dealers judge
overall inventories to be at acceptable levels. Still, because of
the strength of small car sales, dealers report some sales have been
lost because inadequate stocks did not allow timely deliveries. Part
of this inventory leanness was attributed to the high cost of
financing. One dealer noted his daily interest charges per car were
twice what they were fourteen months ago. Used car sales were mixed,
while truck sales have begun to pick up in the downstate region.
Outside the consumer sector, there is increasing evidence of a
slowing in business activity. Although business shipments have
remained robust, there has been an easing in new orders. One
manufacturer noted that the slowdown in home building had crimped
sales of new lumber products and, as a result, inventories were
beginning to build up. For now, this company prefers to absorb the
costs of the supply buildup rather than to reduce mill operations
and then have to play catch-up when demand and prices recover. Other
than the mild accumulation in the home building supply industry,
inventories appear to be generally in line with sales. Indeed, sales
of paper products remain strong and the markets were described as
tight. The chairman of a major chemical firm indicated his industry
was beginning to see a downturn in demand across many product lines.
He noted that major customers were ordering smaller quantities, and
thereby foregoing the discount for larger quantities, in order to
avoid the high interest rates involved in financing larger
quantities. For the most part, upstate manufacturers have not
adjusted their capital spending plans, nor have there been reports
of worker layoffs. None of the respondents have encountered any
financing problems. In fact, several contacts noted that cash flow
positions were so good that no outside financing has been required.
Nonetheless, a noticeable slowdown in payments from customers was
noted by virtually all respondents.
On the financial scene, mortgage lending remains at a virtual
standstill. Many respondents expect the prospective legislation
suspending state-imposed mortgage rate ceilings to have a major
impact on mortgage markets in New York and New Jersey. Currently,
mortgage usury ceilings are 10 1/4 percent in New York and 10 1/2
percent in New Jersey. It is expected that the suspension of these
ceilings will increase the availability of mortgage funds. At this
point there is confusion over some of the legal aspects surrounding
the legislation. In New York, one of the uncertainties is whether
the law will override the state's "120-day rule," which prevents
lenders from charging a higher rate than the rate prevailing when a
mortgage application is completed for 120 days.