Moderate gains in Christmas spending provided welcome support to the
District economy during the past month. The slump in housing and
automobile sales continued. Loan demand slackened. Consumer
delinquencies moved upward. So far, unemployment rates have not
risen. The tourist industry was strengthened by the announcement of
huge investments in the New Orleans area and Orlando. Orange growers
face a reduction in revenue because lower prices are expected to
more than offset increased yields. Prices for broilers and hogs have
finally risen, improving prospects for producers.
Initial reports for the entire Christmas season indicate retail
sales levels, in real terms, commensurate with or slightly better
than comparable year-ago figures. A property management contact
described real sales at his various malls and shopping centers in
southern Louisiana as even with levels established last Christmas.
Inflation-adjusted sales for a major Atlanta-based retail firm were
better than expected, registering a moderate increase. However, this
firm's officials share in the prevailing concern regarding sales for
the first quarter of 1980. Its bad checks and credit card
delinquencies have worsened. A company spokesman believes his
customers have accumulated all the debt they can handle and feels
the next few months are crucial because the repayment of
indebtedness will almost certainly cause those customers to
retrench. Retail inventories have been strictly controlled for many
months and, therefore, should not prove excessive unless a severe
fallout in sales occurs.
Sales of automobiles contracted appreciably. Notable declines
occurred in Baton Rouge, Jacksonville, central Florida, and southern
Mississippi. Large and intermediate car sales suffered most. Late-model used auto and compact sales, particularly GM X cars, were
generally good. Inventories continue to be pared to a minimum,
primarily because of excessive carrying costs. For example, a Ford
dealer on the Mississippi coast wants to reduce orders to get his
normal 60-day supply down to 30 days. GM dealers there will reduce
inventories even further in 1980.
Single-family residential construction was curtailed considerably
throughout the District, and a recent sizable drop in building
permits is certain to further depress this sector. Building permits
in Huntsville, Alabama for single-family and multi-family structures
are only one-third and one-eighth of year-ago figures, respectively.
Substantial declines in permits were also reported for Tallahassee
and large metropolitan areas of Tennessee. A large Florida bank
forecasts a 20 percent downturn in new residential units in 1980.
Residential mortgage demand has fallen markedly. An Atlanta Federal
Home Loan Bank officer reports most S&Ls are encountering a profit
squeeze. For example, an Atlanta S&L experienced a one-point
increase in its cost of savings during the past year, while its
mortgage yield increased by only 35 basis points.
Loan demand dipped in most parts of the District. A Jacksonville
banker attributes a decrease in loan demand to high interest rates
and selective screening. High interest rates, the postponement of
projects, and lower inventories are responsible for a gradual
decline in loan demand for a central Florida contact. Commercial
loan demand remains soft generally. Consumer loan demand continues
to be reasonably strong in south central Tennessee, even though
smaller-sized loans are being granted. A Melbourne, Florida banker
notes a continuing increase in personal bankruptcies related to
credit cards and personal loans.
Unemployment rates remain at relatively low levels. Nonetheless,
layoffs in industries that typically weaken prior to a recession
(automobiles and residential building materials) are evident. A
substantial number of workers at an Atlanta GM assembly plant were
laid off during the last half of December due to excessive
inventories. In Mississippi, workers at a GM parts supply factory
are on a 4-day workweek. Several hundred Ford glass plant workers in
Nashville are on an extended layoff. The slump in housing
construction caused a work force reduction at a large Masonite plant
in Mississippi.
The pace of tourist sector investment will accelerate markedly by
the building of $750 million theme park near New Orleans and a $600
million commercial and tourist complex in Orlando. "New Orleans,
Past, Present, and Future" may exceed Disney World in size and
employ 7,000 upon completion. Plaza International in Orlando will
consist of convention hotels, restaurants, and entertainment and
retail facilities to complement a planned Orange County Civic
Center. The creation of 11,300 permanent positions is anticipated
over a ten-year construction period.
This year's orange crop is estimated to be about 20 percent higher
than production for the last two seasons. But, prices have slid 30
percent below the year-ago level, suggesting a sizable shortfall in
total revenue. District winter wheat acreage expanded by 50 percent
vis-a-vis 9 percent for the nation. Georgia's acreage more than
doubled. Shrimpers in Georgia are experiencing their best harvest in
10 years. This year's catch and total revenue may set records.
The outlook for broiler and hog producers, which has been gloomy for
months, has improved. Some recovery in broiler prices, combined with
stable feed costs in recent weeks, has created renewed optimism.
Broiler production has grown moderately after dropping sharply below
year-ago levels during November. Hog prices have climbed markedly
from their very low mid-November level, and Georgia producers plan a
29-percent rise in pig production for the December-February period.