The economy of the Twelfth District exhibits persistent strength
with no reports of major declines in employment or production. The
housing industry and automobile retailing activity continue to be
extremely weak, however, and there is mounting evidence that this
weakness is spreading to allied industries. Retail sales over the
holiday were quite good, but many retailers are gloomy over the
prospects for the first quarter of 1980. Loan demand has fallen off
sharply in most parts of the District and most bankers anticipate
continued declines in lending as the "pipeline" of commitments dries
up. Harvests were generally good in the District and the prospects
for the agricultural sector in 1980 are believed to be bright.
Residential construction activity has fallen off sharply throughout
the district. In Utah, for example, residential construction permits
declined approximately 20 percent in l979 compared to 1978. Similar
reports were received from the states of Washington and Oregon. Home
resales are also very weak. Homes in California, for example, are
now staying on the market much longer although the housing market in
the San Fernando Valley and Orange County areas of Southern
California is still very active. There is no evidence of widespread
softening of housing prices.
The weakness in the housing industry has begun to have repercussions
in the lumber industry and other activities associated with housing.
A regional lumber manufacturer in Oregon reports that production is
off 20 to 25 percent. Closures of both plywood facilities and
sawmills are also reported in Oregon, with the loss of about 1,000
more jobs than is usual for this time of year. Employment data for
the state of California show an abnormal decline in November in the
lumber and furniture industries although the absolute numbers
involved are small. Prices of dimension lumber have dropped by about
a third since early September. Non-residential construction activity
is credited with temporarily cushioning the building supply
industries from a more severe decline and some observers expect
considerably worsened conditions in the coming months as non-residential construction falters.
Automobile retailers are reported to be in severe straits in some
parts of the District. A survey of dealers in Salt Lake City
resulted in remarks about sales such as "almost non-existent" and
"worst in twenty years." In Seattle, however, dealers have
accommodated high flooring costs by cutting inventories and sales
are reported to be "fair." Sales of small and foreign cars continue
to be stronger than sales of large domestic automobiles.
There are very few reports of weakness in the District's economy
outside the housing and automobile sectors. Demand for aluminum
products is so strong that a major producer is allocating the
product to its customers. Recent rainfall in the Northwest has
removed the threat of hydroelectric power cutbacks that would have
hurt aluminum production. High world prices for lead, zinc, gold and
copper have boosted the value of output from the Coeur d'Alene
mining district in the Northwest. If current metals prices hold, the
mining district's 1980 production is expected to be more than triple
last year's figures. The Secretary of Interior announced last month
that the intermountain power project will be located near Delta,
Utah. Construction of this $4-6 billion plant is expected to further
boost that area's economy.
The demand for skilled technical and clerical labor remains high
throughout much of the Twelfth District. The unemployment rate of
clerical labor in Southern California is estimated to be only 2
percent, for example. A major transportation company reports strong
demand for its pipeline and rail services despite weakness in the
forest products and automobile industries.
The large department stores in the District report a level of
holiday sales ranging from "good" to "exceeding our budgets." A
regional manager of Sears in Utah added that regional sales were
better than those for Sears nationally. Sales of kitchenware and
softgoods were stronger than sales of consumer durables. Most
retailers are apprehensive about the prospects for the first quarter
of the year and have maintained trim inventories.
Loan demand is generally weak throughout the District. However, a
major bank headquartered in Southern California reports strong
demand for commercial loans and loans for commercial and industrial
construction. The weakness in demand for consumer loans, auto loans
and mortgage loans is ascribed to consumer resistance to high
interest rates. Several lenders in the District have dropped their
rates but still have no significant loan volume. In those states
without binding usury limits, funds are reported to be "generally
available" at the prevailing interest rates. However, applicants in
many parts of the District are having difficulty qualifying at
present interest rates. A bank in Oregon reports that only one out
of every four mortgage loan applicants is able to qualify for a
loan. Delinquencies on consumer loans are reported to be on the
rise, although they still remain at reasonable levels. Bankers in
the District generally expect bankruptcies and foreclosures to
increase in 1980. They also expect loan volumes to weaken further as
previous commitments dry up.
The agricultural sector in the District is in good shape after the
successful harvests of 1979. Banks in the central valley of
California enjoyed strong deposit growth because of good harvests
and there are no reports of anticipated farm credit problems.
Inventories of farm equipment are high as a hedge against the
increasing prices of this equipment. Farmers expect the markets for
beef cattle, dairy cows and farm crops to be strong in 1980.