As 1979 ends, signs of softening in the Ninth District economy
persist. Consumers continue to be hesitant to spend, businesses have
started cutting back their ordering, and loan requests are still
declining. The region, however, is not yet in a recession.
Industrial activity remains strong, employment is high, and
agricultural conditions are good.
The signs of softening persist...
In November we said consumers seemed hesitant to spend, and this
assessment hasn't changed. Adjusted for inflation, December sales at
most stores have been either the same as or slightly less than a
year ago. According to this Bank's directors, home and auto sales
are down from a year ago. In the Minneapolis/St. Paul metropolitan
area, for example, 10 percent fewer homes have been sold recently
and about 40 percent fewer homes are now listed for sale compared to
last year at this time.
Consumer reluctance to spend is one reason why manufacturers are
starting to receive fewer new orders. A director affiliated with a
large national manufacturer indicates that in December his firm's
new orders have weakened. Another national manufacturer reports a
slight falloff in the incoming order rate at one industrial
division.
This softening in new orders, along with the weakness in consumer
spending, is reflected in a continuing cutback in loan requests at
district financial institutions. In November we reported that
consumers were requesting fewer loans, and this cutback is
continuing, especially on loans to finance homes and large durable
goods. The Savings League of Minnesota, for example, reports that
its members' mortgage loan applications in late November were 28
percent below a year ago. Our sources also indicate that businesses
are still requesting fewer loans.
A main cause of this letup in spending and lending is high interest
rates. At present rates, many consumers cannot afford the monthly
payments required to buy a large durable good or a house. Interest
expense has become the fastest increasing business cost. To reduce
it, businesses are cutting back inventories.
...but the Ninth District is still not in a recession
In our last report we said strong industrial activity, employment
gains, and good agricultural conditions were keeping the district
out of a recession, and this is still true.
District industrial activity remains strong. District manufacturers
responding to our survey expect their fourth-quarter shipments to be
16 percent ahead of a year ago. A recent University of Minnesota
survey also reports strong manufacturing activity in the region.
Complementing the manufacturing strength is considerable petroleum
and coal exploration and production in Montana and North Dakota.
To accommodate this expansion in industrial activity, district
employers are still hiring more workers. District help-wanted
advertising is currently at a record high. This Bank's directors
also indicate that employers' desires to expand payrolls are keeping
labor markets tight.
Not only have industrial activity and employment remained strong,
but agricultural conditions are even better now than in November.
Then, many district agricultural producers were enjoying income
gains, but two developments were restricting the income of some
grain producers. Poor weather had put the corn harvest way behind
schedule, and many feared that it would not be completed. And even
if it were, transportation problems had made marketing grains
difficult. In November and December, however, the weather
cooperated, most farmers were able to harvest their corn, and
transportation bottlenecks eased. Thus, grain producers are now
marketing their crops at profitable prices and realizing income
gains along with other agricultural producers.