Respondents in the First District report growing evidence of a
slowing in economic activity. Retail sales are disappointing. In the
manufacturing sector, business is generally good, but most firms
have some product lines for which demand has weakened. Loan demand
is no longer growing but remains at a high level; all banks
contacted have ample funds.
The major retailers in New England report that Christmas sales are
not good. A few have seen a pick up in the past few days but others
have become more pessimistic. People are said to be rebelling
against higher prices, although top quality items are selling well.
The head of one large department store chain says he is very worried
about the first half of next year. Despite the weakness most
retailers do not expect to have serious inventory problems. Most had
been managing their inventories cautiously; in addition they are
reacting to the weakness with more promotions and reduced prices.
There are more sales than normal for this time of year.
Manufacturing activity has leveled off. More firms are reporting
that particular products are becoming difficult to sell; however,
these same firms usually have some divisions which are doing well. A
manufacturer of cooking stoves has seen a pronounced decline in
demand; competitors have been trying to maintain sales volumes by
cutting prices. Housing fixtures and other housing products are not
selling as well as they were. The demand for cameras is said to be
low for this time of year. At the same time, the electronics and
aircraft industries are doing well, sales of industrial safety
equipment are picking up after a period of weakness, and military
business is extremely good. No one has seen a significant slowing in
the rate of price increase for materials and parts, although a
recent survey of local purchasing agents found that delivery lead
times are shortening. All those contacted believe their inventories
are under control.
Banking respondents claim to have ample funds and most are seeking
additional customers. However, one banker from northern New England
believes that some of the banks in his area are heavily loaned and
do not have enough liquidity; he expects some consolidations. Loan
demand has softened but is still high. Residential mortgage demand
has definitely weakened. Despite this decline several directors
observed that the level of real estate activity remains high. An
increasing number of people are thought to be using cash for home
purchases.
Professors Houthakker and Samuelson were available for comment this
month. Both respondents agree that a mild recession is underway, and
both expect the economy to remain sluggish beyond the middle of next
year. However, they disagreed about the consequences for the real
economy of the latest round of OPEC oil price increases.
Describing the economy's current performance as "obscure," Professor
Houthakker nevertheless thinks that the available data indicate that
a mild, but perhaps prolonged, recession has begun. In his view the
recently announced OPEC price increases will have no major effect on
either inflation or real output, so he argues that monetary policy
need not be adjusted to the new oil price regime. While it is too
early for a firm judgment on the effectiveness of the October 6
policy switch, Houthakker believes that the current rate of M1
growth of about 5 percent is consistent with an improvement in
inflation without undue pressure on employment. Houthakker is
hopeful that inflation will ease somewhat next year. He notes that
there has been no acceleration in inflation as measured by the NIA
deflators, and he expects a reduction in the rate of CPI increases
in coming months as the extensive sales at the retail level induced
by high inventory carrying costs are reflected in this index.
Houthakker is concerned that recent rapid gold price increases may
become "a self-fulfilling prophecy" that will contribute to the
weakness of the dollar unless the nervousness in the gold market is
alleviated. Since the October 6 actions were evidently not
sufficient to reduce international anxiety over the dollar, he
recommends that massive Treasury gold sales (perhaps as many as five
million ounces) be undertaken in the near future.
Professor Samuelson also expects a mild but prolonged recession. The
recession will be mild because institutional reforms have apparently
reduced the effectiveness of monetary policy for a given change in
interest rates; it will be prolonged because the high rates do still
weaken real activity eventually and because the latest round of OPEC
price increases will sustain the pressure for tight macroeconomic
policies. Samuelson thinks that the new monetary policy operating
procedures may bring closer control of the aggregates. However, he
notes that stabilizing the aggregates will not stabilize GNP as long
as money demand continues to shift unexpectedly. Thus, it is too
early to tell whether the greater control afforded by the new
procedure will be an advantage over the at least partial
adaptability to demand shifts automatically produced by the old
procedure.