Sharp drops in residential construction and new car sales reinforced
the growing conviction that the recession has arrived. Christmas
spending was good throughout most of the nation and provided a
welcome boost. Manufacturing activity declined in several Districts,
and new orders slackened in most Districts. Input prices are
expected to continue escalating. Mortgage funds are available, but
high interest rates cut demand sharply. Demand for commercial and
consumer loans lessened. Employment held steady despite some
cutbacks.
Retail sales, except for automobiles, held their own in December.
Inflation-adjusted sales were equal to or slightly better than last
Christmas for New York, Philadelphia, Richmond, and Atlanta. Holiday
purchases were sluggish for Boston and Chicago. Sales and promotions
were prevalent. Amidst increasing concern about a recession during
the first half of 1980, most retailers are keeping inventories under
very tight control; none report excessive inventories.
New car sales dropped substantially, with large- and mid-size autos
taking the brunt of the decline. Compacts remain popular; some sales
were lost because of shortages and delivery problems. Inventories of
large-size autos are high nationwide. However, New York reported
promotions and markdowns helped clear out 1979 leftovers.
Residential construction, mortgage lending, and real estate sales
slid markedly, except for Boston, where several directors observed a
relatively high level of sales and also an increasing number of
purchases in cash. Several Districts report an availability of
mortgage funds, but reduced demand due to high interest rates.
Mortgage lending is at a virtual standstill in New York and Texas
because of usury ceilings. Additionally, usury ceilings imposed
during December noticeably hampered lending in numerous other
states. Contacts in many Districts believe real estate activity will
turn down even further in several months when commitments are used
up.
A resilient commercial construction sector continued to partially
offset declines in residential building for most Districts. San
Francisco, Dallas, and St. Louis report commercial construction
proceeding at a rapid pace. However, builders in the St. Louis and
San Francisco Districts are apprehensive about the smaller number of
new projects in the planning stage.
Production for industries related to automobiles and residential
construction is off sizably. Steel firms in the Cleveland District
noted a sharp contraction in auto-related orders. A spokesman in the
same District states that new-car tire production shrank 12 percent
this year. Aluminum orders for automobiles fell, but notable support
was provided by above-normal demand for aluminum by the canning
industry and for exports.
A major manufacturer of plastics in the St. Louis District
encountered a reduction in orders for all products used by
automotive and residential building industries. In the First
District, manufacturers of housing fixtures and other housing
products noted a drop in demand. In the Second and Twelfth
Districts, the slump in home building crimped sales of lumber
products. Some smaller mills in the West have been closed.
Manufacturing activity leveled off for Boston, dropped for
Philadelphia, declined slightly for Dallas, and remained stable for
San Francisco. New orders were down broadly for Richmond and
declined for St. Louis. In the New York District, new orders eased,
but the shipments remained robust. New orders lag shipments in the
Chicago District, and businesses have started to cut back on
ordering in the Minneapolis District. However, electrical equipment
industries located in the Boston, Cleveland, and Chicago Districts
report a continued high level of activity. And, machine tool firms
in the Cleveland and Chicago Districts are experiencing sustained
growth of new business.
Input prices for materials and parts continue to rise. Some
discounting in steel occurred. Nearly all manufacturing executives
in the Philadelphia District predicted higher costs for raw
materials by summer, and 80 percent planned to charge more for their
own products by then. No input availability problems were reported.
Loan requests for the Boston and Philadelphia Districts remained at
a high level. Kansas City and Dallas reported notable declines. A
softening in demand was experienced in the remaining Districts. High
costs of borrowing rather than the availability of funds discouraged
businesses and consumers from applying for loans. Reduced
inventories contributed  significantly to the tempering in
commercial loan demand. Many Districts observed cutbacks in consumer
loans, particularly loans for automobiles and higher-priced consumer
durables.
On balance, employment levels were unchanged. Areas of strength
remained, but some Districts reported weaknesses. Philadelphia and
Richmond noted reduced workweeks, and Atlanta reported layoffs in
automotive and residential building industries. Employment levels in
Michigan declined due to the slump in auto production. Labor markets
were relatively strong for Minneapolis, Kansas City, and Dallas. In
the Northwest, employment continued to grow in response to expansion
in the electronics and aircraft industries.
Agricultural reports were generally upbeat. Grain and livestock
sales, and also profits, increased in the Kansas City and
Minneapolis Districts. Transportation bottlenecks in the Midwest
eased. Atlanta reported that prices for broilers and hogs finally
rose. A record apple crop was harvested in Washington State. An
improvement in agricultural bank liquidity occurred in the Kansas
City District, where abruptly higher interest rates reduced loan
demand and favorable agricultural sales increased deposits.