Inflation remains strong in the Tenth District while business
activity continues to slow. Purchasing agents report suppliers have
recently increased prices for material inputs and further increases
are expected in the near future. Retailers report good January sales
performance due to mild winter weather, but expect sales over the
coming year to increase by less than the increase in retail prices.
The recently imposed grain embargo has produced uncertainty in area
grain markets and the resulting decrease in marketings has produced
cash flow difficulties for many farmers. Loan demand is moderate in
most areas of the District while deposit growth is reported to be
moderate to strong.
Purchasing agents contacted in the Kansas City District report input
prices have increased by 10 per cent or more over the past year.
Most purchasing agents indicate that suppliers have raised prices
within the past three months, and all expect further price increases
over the next three months. With the exception of the aircraft and
electronics industries, input availability is not a major problem in
the District, nor is it expected to become one during coming months.
The majority of purchasing agents report that material inventories
are to be kept low during the next several months because of high
interest rates and a pessimistic outlook for the economy. About half
the companies contacted will need to further trim their inventories
to reach their desired lower levels. The majority of firms contacted
indicated that they were operating at about normal capacity for this
time of year. Labor is in adequate supply in the District although a
shortage of skilled labor continues to exist in Wichita and Colorado
Springs.
Most retailers contacted report that sales during January are 6 to
20 per cent higher than a year ago, mostly as a result of mild
weather which has encouraged shopping. Most retailers expect sales
to increase between 5 and 8 per cent during 1980, while retail
prices are expected to grow by 10 per cent or more. Inventories are
currently at satisfactorily low levels, and are expected to be kept
at low levels by means of continued winter clearance sales.
The embargo on grain sales to the Soviet Union is having short-term
effects upon Tenth District agriculture. Area grain markets are
nearly at a standstill, because of farmers' unwillingness to sell
until some of the current price uncertainty is resolved.
Transportation problems are being exacerbated as grain backs up from
port elevators to local grain elevators. Shortages of grain storage
facilities are occurring in many areas and wet grain is compounding
storage problems.
Many farmers are experiencing cash flow difficulties. Loans are now
due that were to be paid by receipts from grain marketings.
Agricultural banks are finding it difficult to meet the increased
demand for loans and extensions because of slow deposit growth at
many rural banks. Machinery and new equipment dealers are also
feeling the impact of the embargo, as orders for new equipment are
being canceled by farmers concerned about 1980 income prospects.
Production yields may decrease in the 1980 crop year as farmers
reduce fertilizer purchases and use more crop rotation.
The District's 1980 winter wheat crop production is heavily
dependent upon weather conditions during the next two months. Wheat
seedlings did not achieve enough growth during the fall to
adequately protect the topsoil.
Lack of snow cover coupled with strong winds has led to erosion of
topsoil in many areas and loss of some planted acreage. Moisture
levels are sufficient at the present time due to recent rainfall.
Snowfall is needed both for moisture and as protection against
extremely cold weather.
Loan demand is moderate in most areas of the Tenth District. High
lending rates and usury ceilings are limiting real estate, business,
and automobile loans. However, growth in agricultural loans remains
relatively strong, in part because the embargo on grain exports to
the Soviet Union is causing increased demand for loans to finance
inventories of wheat and corn. Lending rates have been relatively
stable in the past month and are generally expected to remain stable
for the next several weeks.
Most of the bankers contacted for the January survey report moderate
or strong deposit growth. Money market CD's continue to account for
most of the deposit growth. However, the 2 1/2-year floating rate
CD's are also attracting substantial funds.