Note: This report was prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta based on information collected on or before April 14, 2025. This document summarizes comments received from contacts outside the Federal Reserve System and is not a commentary on the views of Federal Reserve officials.
Overall Economic Activity
Economic activity was little changed since the previous report, but uncertainty around international trade policy was pervasive across reports. Just five Districts saw slight growth, three Districts noted activity was relatively unchanged, and the remaining four Districts reported slight to modest declines. Non-auto consumer spending was lower overall; however, most Districts saw moderate to robust sales of vehicles and of some nondurables, generally attributed to a rush to purchase ahead of tariff-related price increases. Both leisure and business travel were down, on balance, and several Districts noted a decline in international visitors. Home sales rose somewhat, and many Districts continued to note low inventory levels. Commercial real estate (CRE) activity expanded slightly as multifamily propped up the industrial and office sectors. Loan demand was flat to modestly higher, on net. Several Districts saw a deterioration in demand for non-financial services. Transportation activity expanded modestly, on balance. Manufacturing was mixed, but two-thirds of Districts said activity was little changed or had declined. The energy sector experienced modest growth. Agricultural conditions were fairly stable across multiple Districts. Cuts to federal grants and subsidies along with declines in philanthropic donations caused gaps in services provided by many community organizations. The outlook in several Districts worsened considerably as economic uncertainty, particularly surrounding tariffs, rose.
Labor Markets
Employment was little changed to up slightly in most Districts, with one District reporting a modest increase, four reporting a slight increase, four reporting no change, and three reporting a slight decline. This is a slight deterioration from the previous report with a few more Districts reporting declines. Hiring was generally slower for consumer-facing firms than for business-to-business firms. The most notable declines in headcount were in government roles or roles at organizations receiving government funding. Several Districts reported that firms were taking a wait-and-see approach to employment, pausing or slowing hiring until there is more clarity on economic conditions. In addition, there were scattered reports of firms preparing for layoffs. Most Districts and markets reported an improvement in overall labor availability, although there were some reports of constraints on labor supply resulting from shifting immigration policies in certain sectors and regions. Wages generally grew at a modest pace, as wage growth slowed from the previous report in multiple Districts.
Prices
Prices increased across Districts, with six characterizing price growth as modest and six characterizing it as moderate, similar to the previous report. Most Districts noted that firms expected elevated input cost growth resulting from tariffs. Many firms have already received notices from suppliers that costs would be increasing. Firms reported adding tariff surcharges or shortening pricing horizons to account for uncertain trade policy. Most businesses expected to pass through additional costs to customers. However, there were reports about margin compression amid increased costs, as demand remained tepid in some sectors, especially for consumer-facing firms.
Highlights by Federal Reserve District
Boston
Economic activity increased slightly, as the outlook became more pessimistic on tariff-related concerns. Prices rose modestly, but contacts perceived new upside risks to inflation. Employment edged up, although hiring plans became more cautious in response to increased uncertainty. IT services contacts experienced strong revenue growth and were expected to be relatively unaffected by tariffs.
New York
Economic activity contracted modestly as heightened uncertainty weighed on businesses and consumers. Employment was steady to up slightly. Price increases picked up to the higher end of the moderate range. Businesses expressed significant concern about tariffs. Outlooks darkened, with many businesses anticipating declining activity and rising prices.
Philadelphia
Business activity declined modestly during the current Beige Book period after a slight decrease in the last period. Nonmanufacturing activity fell moderately. Employment declined slightly; wages and prices again grew modestly. Generally, sentiment fell, and firms grew less optimistic about future growth amid rising economic uncertainty.
Cleveland
Reports suggested that Fourth District business activity continued to be flat in recent weeks, and contacts expected activity to remain flat in the months ahead. Consumer spending declined, though some auto dealers noted customers pulling forward purchases ahead of potential tariffs. Employment levels increased slightly, and wage pressures remained moderate.
Richmond
The regional economy grew slightly in recent weeks despite some pockets of weakness tied to federal staffing and contract spending. Consumer spending was flat. Residential and commercial real estate activity picked up slightly. Non-financial service providers reported a modest decline in demand and hesitation from customers to make investment decisions. Employment was little changed and price growth remained moderate amid upward price pressures from tariffs.
Atlanta
The Sixth District economy grew slightly. Employment was flat. Wages, nonlabor costs, and firms' prices increased modestly. Retail sales fell slightly, and travel and tourism declined modestly. Home sales rose modestly. Commercial real estate conditions softened. Transportation activity grew slowly. Loan growth was moderate. Manufacturing declined. Energy activity rose slowly.
Chicago
Economic activity was little changed. Consumer spending increased modestly; employment and construction and real estate activity were up slightly; manufacturing was flat; business spending declined slightly; and nonbusiness contacts saw a slight decline in activity. Prices increased modestly, wages rose slightly, and financial conditions tightened. Prospects for 2025 farm income were unchanged.
St. Louis
Economic activity has remained unchanged, but the outlook has slightly deteriorated. Heavy rains negatively impacted neighborhoods, farms, and businesses. Contacts expressed a lot of uncertainty and an elevated effort in estimating the impact of tariffs and ways to reduce cost increases and supply disruptions.
Minneapolis
District economic activity was lower. Employment declined and labor demand continued to soften. Wage growth was modest, and price increases were moderate. Consumer spending was lower with some exceptions. Manufacturing experienced modest improvements. Construction activity fell overall. Commercial real estate was mostly unchanged, and home sales declined. Agricultural conditions remained weak.
Kansas City
Economic activity in the Tenth District grew slightly, but expectations about business activity and consumer spending weakened considerably. Amid shifting conditions, businesses indicated they were most likely to adjust pricing to adapt. Expectations of price growth rose at a robust rate, most pronounced in goods sectors. Employment levels were stable but hiring stalled.
Dallas
Growth in the Eleventh District economy slowed to a slight pace. Nonfinancial services activity stalled. Retail sales dipped while manufacturing and oil field activity rose modestly. Lending growth moderated. Commercial real estate activity was steady, while housing demand remained tepid. Employment increased, and input cost pressures accelerated. Outlooks deteriorated as heightened uncertainty surrounding domestic and trade policy hindered firms' ability to plan.
San Francisco
Economic activity slowed slightly. Employment fell slightly. Wages grew slightly, and prices rose modestly. Demand for business and consumer services and for retail goods weakened. Activity in manufacturing and residential and commercial real estate markets softened slightly. Lending activity and conditions in agriculture were stable. The economic outlook worsened materially.